JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to
President Trump's repeated
and unsubstantiated
claim that three to five
million votes were cast
illegally in the 2016 election.
He set up a special
commission to investigate,
but one of its first acts
has drawn condemnation
from across the country.
Hari Sreenivasan
is here with that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yesterday, the
vice chair of that commission
sent a letter to all 50
states asking for voter data
that includes addresses,
party I.D., voter history, and
Social Security information.
The commission asked that data
be sent to the White House
by mid-July, but didn't say
how it would be used,
other than to examine for
vulnerabilities in the system.
We take a closer look
now with Rick Hasen.
He is a law professor
at the University of
California, Irvine.
He writes the Election Law blog.
Rick, the "NewsHour"'s
been reaching out to
states all day long.
And we have got nine definite
no's, 18 that might comply in
whole or in part, and a few
other states that are
still looking at it.
Often, what we hear there is
that there are apparently laws
on the books in certain states
that prohibit, even if it's
public information, who can look
at the information and why it
can be looked at.
Explain.
RICK HASEN, University of
California, Irvine: Well, some
of this information, depending
on the state, is
available publicly.
People can buy it.
Some of this is not available.
And, in fact, just before we
came on, I saw a story that Kris
Kobach himself, the personal
who has asked for this
information, he himself
cannot produce the
Social Security numbers
that he has demanded because
that would violate the law
in the state of Kansas.
This doesn't seem to have
been very well thought out.
Not only do we not know what
the information is going
to be used exactly to do.
It doesn't appear that this
information even legally can be
provided by a lot of the states.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, Kris
Kobach, as his role as secretary
of state of Kansas, can't
provide the information
that he's asking for, right?
RICK HASEN: To himself.
That's right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Got it.
Right.
All right, what about the
scope of the investigation?
There seems to be a lot of
focus on measuring or protecting
the integrity one person, one
vote.
I don't see any description in
here about any Russian meddling
that might have happened.
RICK HASEN: Well, so it's
not clear exactly what this
commission is going to do.
Initially, the president said
he wanted to look into the
potential for voter fraud.
There are a couple of Democrats
on the commission who said that
they wanted to look into Russian
meddling.
Kobach said he might be open
to that, but that wasn't on
the list of questions that
was sent to various
state election officials.
It's not clear what this
group is going to do, what
it's going to produce.
But I'm concerned that
it's going to be something
that is just going to try
to support the president's
agenda, claiming that there's
a lot of voter fraud, and use
that to make it harder for
people to be able
to register to vote.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is this
the kind of information
that a campaign really
would pay money for?
RICK HASEN: Well, in some
states, campaigns do pay money
for this kind of information.
The fact that the
information is going to
sent to the president's
office is concerning.
Rather than having
outside professional staff
or rather than having
social scientists who
study this information, we know
that this information is going
literally to the executive
office of the president.
We don't know how
it's going to be kept.
We don't know how secure
it's going to be, on
what kind of servers.
We don't have any information.
But the concerns about privacy,
about identity theft, about
the information being used for
political purposes, I think
these are all legitimate
questions to be asked.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, finally,
is there a question here on the
role of the federal government?
There seemed to be some pushback
from states when it came to
the Department of Homeland
Security going out to them,
saying we have this potential
for hacking, we would like
to help you secure
your networks.
RICK HASEN: Absolutely.
There has been this long
tradition, especially on
the Republican side, of
talking about federalism
and states' rights in this area.
And we're even seeing some
pushback now from states like
Mississippi that are saying they
are not going to cooperate
with providing this information
to the federal government.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All
right, Rick Hasen, a
professor at University
of California, Irvine,
thanks so much.
RICK HASEN: Thank you.